---
title: " Mermaid"
excerpt: ""
categories:
tags:
permalink: /mermaid
published: false
comments: true

---

If you've ever tried to explain anything complicated - be it an algorithm, a code base structure or a project plan - you probably know how useful good diagrams are.

However, with lots of us working remotely and interacting with colleagues only virtually, it is more difficult to share spontaneous drawings when explanations fall short. While it was easy to have a whiteboard session in the office where we can all draw on a board together, this is a lot more awkward online. Trying to draw boxes with your mouse in a drawing app, or dragging clunky arrows that never seem to be the right way around, all while your coworkers are watching your shared screen in a call is not fun, to say the least.

But there is a way to generate all your diagrams quickly and painlessly with code only, so you'll never have to draw a box again!

Mermaid is a tool that lets you create very complicated diagrams in Markdown - it works with simple commands and an intuitive syntax. You don't have to draw anything, just write down what you want to see! You can create flowcharts to help you understand algorithms, Gantt charts for project management, pie charts, and many other common diagram types. Mermaid arranges the diagram sensibly for you, so you won't have to worry about manually rearranging all your boxes if you forgot a middle step in a flowchart.

In this article, I will tell you about the different ways to use Mermaid, and show you some examples of what it's capable of.

### But why do we need diagrams?

Human brains are much better at understanding images and patterns than text. We process a complicated structure faster if we see its visual representation, and it turns out we also remember it better - this is called the [picture superiority effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Picture_superiority_effect). This is also intuivie - you can draw conclusions form a bar or pie chart much faster than reading a list of numbers.

Pcitures also grab the audience's attention. If you give a lengthy, complicated explanation without a visual aid, most of your listeners will have zoned out after a minute, or already forgot the beginning. If you include a diagram, they can find their way back to your explanation.

They are also helpful to draw for yourself if you just want to understand something that requiers more infmation than what your working memory can deal with. Drawing the high level code base architecture, the information flow in a components or a lower level OOP class designs can help you spot design errors upfront, when it's the cheapest to correct.

### What makes Mermaid really cool

Unlike lots of other GUI-based graph drawing software, Mermaid is completely text-based. No painful dragging of boxes and arrows, you just type code based on a Markdown-inspired syntax. This makes the diagrams very easily maintainable. You will always have the code that generated the diagram, so you won't end up with a beautiful, but outdated image file you can't modify anymore.

This also means that you can easily see the changes to a diagram, unlike with any other image-based method. If you keep your diagram under Git version control (which you can easily, as it's just text), a simple `git diff` will show you what changed in a comprehensive way.

I've already mentioned that Mermaid rearranges the boxes for you if you decide to add more stuff to your diagram. This makes it possible to generate diagrams on the fly in a video call, much faster than hand-drawing them on a laptop. I have found that if you spend about half an hour on learning the syntax, you can completely replace any other graph drawing tool you use. Personally, I really hate drawing with a mouse, so for me Mermaid is superior to using Paint or OneNote, and with some practice it is much faster to use than draw.io for example.

### What can mermaid do?

Let's look at some examples mermaid can render for us, and what the code that generates it looks like:




- Why graphs are cool
    read me for code architecture
    whiteboard session

- Mermaid
    easier than drawing graphs live on a call
- Where and how to use it 




https://markdownmonster.west-wind.com/docs/_5ef0x96or.htm
https://dennisokeeffe.medium.com/diagrams-with-mermaid-9a6395ef105f
https://betterprogramming.pub/making-diagrams-fun-again-with-mermaid-8a2c9ea3e471
https://mermaid-js.github.io/mermaid/#/
http://kkpattern.github.io/2015/05/15/Embed-Chart-in-Jekyll.html
#########################################################################################################
## Jupyter notebooks

## Live editor

## Vscode
Markdown Preview Mermaid support
```html
    ```mermaid
    ```
```
## Github pages/Websites:
You can't use plugin on Github pages 
You could render it locally each time and push the code for it, but that's painful
instead, you could do this:
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mermaid/8.0.0/mermaid.min.js"></script>
in your header.html
or download the file, put it somewhere locally and source from there

Then define your chart like this:
```html
<div class="mermaid">
graph TD;
    A-->B;
    A-->C;
    B-->D;
    C-->D;
</div>
```
## jekyll sites:
https://github.com/jasonbellamy/jekyll-mermaid

## Javascript packages yarn
yarn add mermaid
## On gitlab
just works
## Anywhere else
Browser extension. OFC doesn't work if someone doesn't have it
Convert to pic and save it
## Maintainability 
you can diff it and it's really nice


